I want to show you how to prepare a ham
today they're one of those things you
can buy in a supermarket already done
but they're ever so easy to make at home
and it's much cheaper doing it yourself
a really big bit of meat it comes from
the back leg of pork it's the hind leg
that they cut off so it's quite chunky
what you first of all need to do is work
out if you've got a big enough pan so
check your kitchen sometimes my butcher
is very friendly and he'll often lend me
a big pan so I've got a very big
stockpot here and I've put the meat into
it now sometimes again it's good to
check with your butcher if you're buying
one from a supermarket that's uncooked
read good labels because sometimes you
need to soak them overnight or boil them
for 10 minutes beforehand just to get
rid of the excess salt but quite often
nowadays you can just pop them right in
what you want to do is just bring it up
to a boil you can add some onions if you
like some carrots and then turn it down
for a very gentle simmer and skim off
you can see there's some scum that's
risen up here so I'm just going to skim
that off like this because you don't
really want that and then you just let
it cook away for about 25 minutes per
450 grams and then you can pretty much
leave it it will take a quite a long
time because it is a big bit of meat but
what you need to just check back every
half an hour or hour or so and just top
it up a little bit more boiling water
because you do really want it to be
covered then when that's done you need
to take that out you can keep the stock
we use it for a soup it's lovely with a
lentil soup and then when it's cool
enough to touch put it on a board what
you want to do is to take the skin off
now sometimes this will peel off
sometimes you need to use a knife to get
rid of it so you want to just take the
skin layer off what you don't want to do
is take off all the fat because when you
cook it in an oven you actually want to
keep that to keep the meat lovely and
moist so I'm just taking that off like
this now this ham has actually just been
salted but if you look at you can also
get hams that are smoked as well which I
really like it's one of those things it
was used in olden days as they say just
to preserve meat in the winter so it
keeps that little bit longer so there we
go not the most beautiful job in the
world but it's not that hard to do
either
take it off like this there we go and
there we go you can see this one's got a
bone in it again it differs from butcher
to butcher as to how your meat will come
sometimes butchers will actually take
the whole bone out for you and just wrap
it up so if you don't have a big pan
then you should ask your butcher to do
that because that really does cut down
the size now I've taken the skin off
we've got a lovely layer of fat and all
you want to do is score the fat and I do
it into kind of a diagonal crisscross
shape like this just need a sharp knife
and you don't want to run it down into
the meat you just want to very gently
score through the fat like this and then
just run it the other way like this
there we go
that will help the fat drain away now
topping wise I'm going to use marmalade
which is a really classic way of
preparing it but there's all sorts of
flavorings you can put on top you can
put bread crumbs if you like I've also
tried using treacle as well which is
lovely and things like mustard goes
really nicely with ham so that's one of
those things you can really experiment
with what you like and try out new
flavors but fruit I often find really
works well with that salty ham flavor so
just Pat on it's probably about a
quarter of the jar of marmalade I'll be
using for this ham you just want to dab
that all over don't worry about making
it too neat it doesn't have to be
perfect because we are going to pop it
in another limb cook it some more anyway
so put that all over there and then what
you want to do to finish it off before
serving it all you need to do is pop it
into a really hot oven about 220 degrees
should do the trick and then depending
on your joint of meat it'll take
anything from about 20 minutes up to
about an hour for a really big one and
all you're doing is just caramelizing
the skin so here's one I made earlier
and that's beautiful you can see the
skins lovely and caramelized it's rich
and gold that's perfect you can eat it
pull it straight out of the oven and eat
it which is what my family loves to do
on Boxing Day or alternatively in the
summer I think a ham makes a really good
picnic treat so you take that along with
you take a sharp knife cut it up on a
picnic and the beauty of a ham is you've
got sandwiches always left over because
it is a big bit of meat and that's how
you cook a ham
you